When I started my Contemporary English Literature course
about six years ago, the core of this course is to priori-
tize student engagement and foster a genuine interest in
reading. Existing research has noticed a lack of interest in
reading among medical students; moreover, there is also
a tendency of superﬁcial reading or reading merely for
entertainment [13–15]. Such deﬁciency in serious reading
has greatly hindered students’ understanding of medicine
as a humane art. Therefore, I designed the course to be
of literature rather than narrative medicine to cultivate a
stimulating environment that would encourage students to
enjoy reading. Over the years I slip small portions of the
quintessence of narrative medicine in my lectures, albeit
refraining from overt references to the ﬁeld. After several
rounds of running this course on Contemporary English
Literature, I still regard it fundamentally as a literature
course tailored for medical students rather than a strict
narrative medicine course. While the boundary between the
two domains may be rather vague in the most general sense,
the underlying principles guiding each approach are dis-
tinct. Narrative medicine, with the emphasis on medicine,
expects clinical outcomes in the biomedical context whereas
literature reading aims to foster an appreciation of stories
and train students’ narrative competence [16]. Overempha-
sis on narrative medicine in the pre-clinical phase may not
be the most judicious use of valuable class time. Conversely,
a literature course needs to maintain students’ attention
and keep them as involved as possible. It is therefore
almost a natural development that “interest ﬁrst” becomes
the golden rule of this Contemporary English Literature
course governing the structure and content of each class
session.
The principle of “interest ﬁrst” turns out to be crucial
for the students I’m working with. The majority of them are
sophomores and juniors who have never read any English
novels in its original and unabridged forms. In the introduc-
tory session of the course, I routinely ask the enrolled stu-
dents whether they have ever read any full-length English
novels. Among the 50 students for each round the course,
only a handful of them would give the positive answer. The
students may have achieved extraordinary scores in the
College Entrance Examination, but it is still understandable
that they would feel intimidated to read English literary
works. A recent study reveals that more than half of the
surveyed students ﬁnd it dicult to read English literary
works, but over 90 % of them are interested in registering
in a guided reading course in English literature [17]. Making
the course engaging, less theoretical, and more aligning to
the students’ reading habits becomes the course’s lifeline
to keep the students reading and maintain their motiva-
tion, enthusiasm, and conﬁdence in learning English. Some
would argue that reading short stories may be an alterna-
tive. This is true in its own merits, but reading a literary ﬁc-
tion has been proved by empirical research to best improve
thereader’stheoryofmind[18]. Moreover, a novel, in its
extensive prose shape, aords the revelation of character
complexities, event intricacies, and choice dilemmas that
mirror the intricacies of real-life medical encounters.
With the above-mentioned guidelines in mind, I wrote
the following description for “Contemporary Novels in
English”:
This course is for students interested in reading contemporary
novels in English. As an introductory survey class, it aims to
bring together novels of dierent contemporary genres (detec-
tive, dystopia, fantasy, graphic, memoir, adventure, Si-Fi, etc.)
and by authors of dierent cultural lineages (American, African,
British, Canadian, Chinese, Irish, Japanese, etc.). Central issues for
discussion include but are not limited to the relationship between
past and present, ﬁction and truth, contemporary adaptations of
the classics, media and literature, science and humanity.